Okay, the tape is rolling. Is my voice okay to you now? Yeah, except you're a
little faint, so if I have to say what, that's why. No problem. We ended away.
Tell us a little bit about how you got involved in writing science fiction.
Well, I first started writing four science fiction magazines way back in 1962, I
think. Actually, I was a graduate student and had been trying to make a little
money on the side, as most graduate students do. And so I've been writing some
speculation science articles for various magazines like Missiles and Rockets and
Science Digest. And I sent one of these to Galaxy, and Fred Pohl bought it. And
I didn't write that one under my own name. It was about our
lack of knowledge about Pluto, basically. And the fact that Pluto really doesn't
belong where Bode's law says it should be. In fact, it looks like it's usurped
Neptune's place in Bode's law. And so I just sort of dreamed up a half-fact,
half-fiction article, and that Pluto really was a giant artifact, a gravity
catapult, that had been sent to the solar system by some other civilization, and
had stopped at the solar system by pushing Neptune out of the way with its
gravity forces, which, if you make a gravity catapult, it can push things as
well as pull things. And it was sitting out there, waiting for us, and around
this gravity catapult was a tiny moon which had a message for us. If you can get
out this far, this gravity catapult will take you to the stars. And that has now
been reprinted in Jerry Pournelle's collection on black holes as Pluto is black.
And the interesting thing about it is that not too many years ago they found out
that Pluto really does have a moon, so maybe it's going to come true. I don't
know. Anyway, that was my first entry into the
science fiction world besides reading it all the time. I mean, I was really
influenced by science fiction in my youth. But the way I got into actually
writing fiction was Larry Niven tricked me. And what happened was that Larry
Niven and Jerry Pournelle were running a lecture series at UCLA, invited me to
come and give a scientific talk on gravity as part of their series. It was how
science fiction and science interact. And at the close of one of the sessions
that Larry was talking on, he said he wanted to write a story about beings that
lived on a neutron star. Frank Drake had mentioned this idea a number of years
before. He said he really wanted to write that story. And that night at the
cocktail party that they threw, I said, I said, Larry, I'll tell you what I'll
do. I will work up all the scientific details behind the story, because I know a
lot about neutron star physics. And it would be a fun story to read, and I like
to read hard science fiction. And what I'd like to do is give you enough facts
so that you can write a really hard science fiction story without too many
errors in it. Sometimes Larry does write stuff that has some problems, because
he isn't a scientist. And so I worked up all the science and gave him about 25,
30 pages of notes. And he said, gee, I'm busy right now working with Jerry
Pournelle on something called Lucifer's Hammer. And I'm pretty busy. I'll tell you
what we'll do. Why don't we just sort of make this a collaboration. You write
the first draft of the story. And then I'll take it over from there and rewrite
the thing because you're not a writer and I am. and that we will get the best of
both worlds. Well, so I went back and wrote the first draft. When I came back,
he was still busy, and so I ended up finding out that I wanted to read this
story, and the only way I could read that story was to write it first, so I had
to write it. And so Larry Niven tricked me into getting into science fiction.
You mentioned in the acknowledgments to Dragon's Egg that Larry Niven gave them
something to do he must have suggested something for the aliens to do yeah
basically Larry by the way it's just plain Dragon's Egg with no teeth but anyway
Larry Niven basically gave the thousand to one, I mean, excuse me, the million
to one time difference.
and the main thing that he brought out was the fact that the important part of
the story was not all the science, which would have been in my tendency to
write, but the problems of how do you communicate with somebody that lives and
dies a million times faster than you do. and if those beings since they would be
thinking a million times faster than you would figure out that you were there
long before you could figure out they were there and they had to figure out a
way to communicate with you and signal you that they were there before you left
and so he mentioned the fact that for instance somebody on the neutron star
would have to climb a mountain and send a signal and that might take them many
generations actually in the story I compressed it into one generation basically
but that was the kind of attitude that he brought toward the story that helped a
lot
you also mentioned Lester Del Rey as helping turn a paper into a novel. How did
this process occur? Well, my very first draft, of course, was quite rough from a
writing point of view. And when Lester looked at it, he saw some potential in
it, but as it was, as the manuscript was sent to him, it wasn't acceptable. It
wasn't a book. and he sat down and typed up 14 pages, single-spaced, of detailed
criticism of the manuscript. And those 14 pages, when I followed them to the
letter, and I don't think I disagreed with him on but, say, one or two things,
when I went back through the manuscript and took his suggestions, and then
looked at the resultant. It was, you know, it began to be readable instead of
being a, well, a science fact article, I guess. You know, it had some flow, it
had some characterization,
but, you know, it still was a hard science fiction novel.
Have you gotten some feedback from Frank Drake as he read this book and
commented on it? Oh yes, after about the first draft, I think I sent Frank Drake
the same draft that I sent Lester Del Rey and said that I really appreciated
using his idea and would he mind if I named one of the characters after him and
he said that he and his wife had been
excuse me Frank Drake said that he and his wife knew that there was a baby on
the way And if it was a girl, they'd already picked out the name for it. And it
was to be Amelita Shakashiri Drake. And he said, if I wanted to use that name,
that would be fine, because it sort of, you know, matched the names that I
already had in the story. I was trying to recognize the fact that 50 or 100
years from now, we're going to have a lot more names, which indicate cross
-marrying between cultures. And so he suggested that name, and I thought it was
great, and so I used it. And actually, Amelita Shaka-Shiri Drake was born.
Unfortunately, granddad and grandma didn't get to name the baby, and mommy did,
and it ended up being another Indian name instead of that. Well, Amelita, that's
very good, because you shouldn't stick a baby with trying to match up to some
imaginary character in some novel. And that's, I think, one of the lessons I've
learned. My next novel, I've used a lot of people that I know as character
models, but I'm not going to use their names. It's not a good idea, basically.
In Dragon's Egg, you put in a lot of work on the aliens themselves, the neutron
star, the various strategies for approaching the neutron star, what was the most
difficult thing to work out among these various things I've mentioned?
Well, none of them were very difficult. I think one of the things that amazed me
as I started working on the technical background that I was preparing for Larry
Niven was how everything sort of fell into place if you want to go near a
neutron star
it's kind of dangerous but not if the neutron star is old and so that meant that
the neutron star had to have been made half a million years or so ago which
meant that it probably could have been seen by a supernova and by the way, that
sort of turns out to be the time when the apes turned into humans Maybe I could
use that as a cue that the neutron star would cause the humans to evolve. And
then I said, gee, that's great. Now, why can't I have the human arrival be the
cause for the neutron star happy apes to develop into intelligent beings? And
then very, you know, all of that sort of fell into place. I think the only
problem I really had for a long time was the fact that if you get anywhere near
a neutron star, that gravity fields are so high that the gravity changes, even
across two or three feet, are hundreds and two-hundreds of times Earth gravity.
And so if you tried to get within, if you tried to get close enough to a neutron
star so it filled up as much of the area in the sky as the sun does, about a
half degree, tides. You're in orbit. You're in freefall. The only part of you
that's in freefall is you're right in the middle of your body. Your head is a
little further away from the star than your feet, or the middle of your body.
Your head is being pulled off by 200 gravities. Your feet are being pulled off
by 200 gravities while you're being squashed in from the sides by 100 gravities,
and so that you couldn't put a human being within 400 kilometers of a neutron
star without them being torn apart, literally. And then, all of a sudden, one of
these days when I was driving back and forth to work, I realized that if I
allowed the humans to have the capability to make very dense masses, take some
asteroids and turn them into dense asteroids, then I could create a counter
-gravity field. And amazingly enough, when I went through the numbers, it worked
out perfectly. It's really amazing that it worked at all. And so I use this idea
of having six very dense masses around the spacecraft that the humans are in in
order to create a countertide to cancel the neutron star tide. and I thought
that was a lot of fun and I used it in the story and it's scientifically correct
then about a that story by the way the dragon's egg was published in 1980 and
then last year about in June I said gee if very dense masses will protect
against a neutron star how big does a mass have to be to protect against the
very weak forces of the earth tides up in orbit And I found out that tungsten
will do quite well. It's any kind of heavy metal. And so I just have finished
writing a paper which I have submitted to The Physical Review, which is the most
prestigious physics journal in the United States, which points out that if you
take six masses and put them around an experiment that you're trying to do in
Earth orbit, you will create a gravity-free region. over a fairly large area.
I'd say it's about the size of a large double-layer cake, which is enough to do
a significant experiment, and I can cut the earth's tides by a factor of 1,000
to 2,000 using this technique. And it's just amazing. Here's an idea that came
up because of a need in a science fiction story that a year or so later, I find
out may turn out to be a practical technique for making ultra low gravity near
the Earth or space manufacturing and very sensitive gravity experiments and
things like that where you're trying to eliminate any kind of tidal effect. And
so after having written a scientific article and sent it in I shortened it and
I've since have sold this article to Analog, and you should be seeing it in the
whole September, August, September, October issue of Analog. And it's called
Flattening Space. Well, actually, Flattening Space-Time. Because when you
flatten space, by getting rid of not only the gravity, but the gravity tides.
That is the flat space that Einstein talks about when he says that space is not
curved. And it's the tides that indicate that space is curved. And I've gotten
rid of the tides so I've flattened a region of spacetime about the size of a
chocolate birthday cake.
In your paper, did you allude to Dragon's Egg? Yes, I referenced not only the
novel, but I also referenced the article that I did for analog called A Taste of
Dragon's Egg, which appeared, I think it was April of 80. So, in fact, that is
the first reference. And if anybody really ever wants to credit the first
reference to a gravity compensation technique, they'll have to reference a
science fiction magazine and not a journal.
The aliens, I call them Cheela. Is that the correct pronunciation? Yes. The
pronunciation is Cheela.
And I'm glad you got it that way. Because when I originally wrote the novel, I
had it with a single E. And then I found out the word C-H-E-L-A is the, I think
it's the claw in a crab or something like that. And so I added another E and
made it something unique and different. And that's what Mary Lois gave me the
idea for. She's the one that named it Mary Lois, my daughter. And we were trying
to think up some kind of unique name that was fairly easy to pronounce and was
quite different. It didn't have any connotations. And it's amazing how many
short word combinations mean something to somebody. But Sheila, outside of the
crab reference, I couldn't find it. It worked out quite well. The names were so
interesting, did you have to spend a lot of time thinking of those?
Well, once I had placed my imagination and myself on the surface of the neutron
star, once I knew the territory well enough and appreciated the fact that the
light on this star comes from below, not above. So if the sky is black, there's
no light coming out of it except a few stars. Everything is aglow from below.
And the territory is very flat because of the terrific gravity. I began to sort
of appreciate what it was like there. And what I basically did was take the
Indian technique techniques of naming children about things that occurred
shortly after they were born and applied it to the Cheela but put in a hyphen so
it would take out the Indian context and also of course a lot of the Indian
things like eagles and feathers and the sky and things like that don't exist so
I had to do that transfer. The way I saw the Cheela civilization was that since
they were egg layers and not only egg layers but egg layers that abandoned their
young in one sense I'm sure that in the days before they became civilized they
basically abandoned their young just like crocodiles and turtles do. But now the
older people lose their sex drive, the older Cheela lose their sex drives and
take over the mothering of the eggs even though they may be male or female, it
doesn't make any difference. And soon I began to realize that in my dreaming up
of these creatures creatures, I'd end up with a social structure that was sort
of halfway between a Scottish clan and an Indian tribe, and as if both the
Indians and the Scottish were crocodiles that laid eggs instead of having the
problems of mammals that they have to take care of their young. The young are
immediately viable, and crocodiles and turtles, and so are the little tiny
Cheela. So what I tried to do was imagine what it would be like if, instead of
monkeys developing intelligent social interactions, crocodiles developed
intelligent social interactions. Or I guess a better thing to say would be
dinosaurs, because there was a bipedal dinosaur that laid eggs, that had hands
that could manipulate, and unfortunately I guess it didn't live through some
kind of asteroid crunch or comet crunch or something, or maybe a supernova
explosion.
One thing in science fiction we always run into aliens as scientists probably
think that there does exist a lot of life in the universe but I have a little
more trouble accepting that there's that much intelligence in the universe what
are your wanted comments on this topic
the fact that the empty space between stars is full of organic compounds which
are just seem to be formed naturally by carbon and hydrogen and oxygen and a
little bit of starlight and lots of time sort of seems to me that this stuff
that exists out between stars ought to exist just as well on the surface of
planets and so forth. And so that I really firmly believe that there's lots of
life out there because it just sort of seems to form naturally. And we have
physical evidence of it from the molecular spectra we get, not from planets. We
don't have any evidence that there's any organic material on planets. except for
one, ours. But we do have plenty of evidence. There's lots of quite complex
molecular material in space, and so, therefore, I mean, it would be begging the
question to say that it doesn't exist on any other planet but ours. But if you
have a planet that's a decent temperature and so forth, you will find plenty of
organic molecules on it, and I just believe that there is plenty of life. Now,
the next question is intelligent life. There's a good question there. We did
not, I mean, we existed on this world as very happy, non-intelligent, ape-like
beings, or maybe before that we were shrew-like beings, or what mammals have
been around for a long, long time, but they didn't need to be intelligent to
survive.
Why we developed intelligence, nobody knows. Now, in Dragon's Egg, I said that
we had the pressure of a supernova explosion that did it. In Dragon's Egg, for
the neutron star creatures, they were perfectly happy. Cheela, not intelligent.
They didn't know how to count. they really had a very primitive social
organization, not much better than what wolves and crocodiles have and lions
when they form into pods and things like that. And it wasn't until there was a
mystery that required intelligence to solve, in this case, why are these stars
moving around the sky in such a weird way, that intelligence does evolve. So it
could be that you're right, that intelligent life is fairly rare. However, once
it does evolve,
the particular creature that develops it then proceeds to take over not only the
world, but the environment and, you know, not just the animal life of the world.
It starts dominating that, but it even dominates the physical planet on which it
lives. So it's a very strong survival characteristic because we don't have any
enemies except ourselves.
And that's kind of amazing for a naked ape who isn't very strong. But he uses
its intelligence to cage tigers and lions that could rip him apart in a minute,
elephants that stomp on him. It's just amazing what intelligence will do for
you. So, yet, I don't know. There is another problem that's called the Fermi
Paradox, and it's where is everybody? If the universe had a lot of intelligent
species in it, most of them would be billions of years older than we are because
we are on around a second generation star our star is made up of trash left over
from exploding supernovas from the first generation stars and if there were a
lot of intelligent beings they had billions of years to sort of wander slowly at
a snail's pace throughout the galaxy and they should have been here a long time
ago and there's no evidence for it and we aren't finding signals and so there's
a good deal of speculation in the scientific literature right now that there is
no other intelligent race within this galaxy we are the first I don't really buy
the argument because I much prefer to believe that an intelligent being say a
thousand or years or a million years and especially a billion years older than
we are has better sense than to come and say hello to us. And the reason for
that is that what does a civilization that's a million years older or a billion
years older than we are what can they gain from us? the only thing they can gain
from us is to watch us as we develop to see if we develop in a different
direction than they did and find something new that they didn't find because
they evolved from an intelligence viewpoint in a different direction if they
contaminated us with one single evidence one single clue that there existed a
billion-year race, a billion-year-old race out there, our present course of
development would be immediately diverted to try and track theirs. And we would
miss whatever new that we might find. So there's a very strong reason for an
ancient intelligent species to leave us absolutely alone. because otherwise were
of no value to them.
We'll have to talk now about someathery old science fiction themes. Let's start
off with faster-than-light travel. This is forbidden theoretically by the theory
of relativity. What are your thoughts on the future for faster-than-light
travel? Well, let me start, first of all, by saying that faster than light
travel is not forbidden by the special theory of relativity. What the theory of
special relativity says is that an object that is going slower than the speed of
light cannot accelerate up to or through the speed of light. Well, it can't
accelerate through the speed of light because it can't get up to the speed of
light. and the only thing the theory says that if you travel at the speed of
light and you have rest mass to begin with then you need to have ad an infinite
amount of energy to get up to the speed of light it does the special theory of
relativity allows things to move at the speed of light like light or neutrinos
well maybe not neutrinos they may have mass now or gravitons. But there are
things that are allowed to move at the speed of light but only at the cost of
not being able to exist at any speed but the speed of light. You can't have a
photon standing still.
So it also allows things to move below the speed of light. We are moving below
the speed of light. And amazingly enough, that it does allow objects to exist
that move faster than the speed of light, provided those objects have imaginary
mass instead of regular mass. The equations, if an object has imaginary mass, it
must move faster than the speed of light. They're called tachyons. And they're
allowed by the Special Theory of Relativity. And, in fact, in order to slow a
tachyon down to the speed of light, you have to add lots and lots of energy to
it. and the more energy you get add to it the slower it gets and the closer it
gets the speed of light the more energy you take away the faster it gets until
finally when it has almost no energy and it's going nearly at infinite speed but
that's allowed by the special theory now the real question is whether or not an
object can have an imaginary mass and so far as we know no they can't now this
means that if you want to go from being a normal matter object at less from the
speed of light you want to go faster at the speed of light you have to do one of
two things only you have to do at least one thing you've got to turn the mass in
your body from normal matter into imaginary matter how you do that we don't know
yet but if you could do it then you'd automatically be going faster at the speed
of light it wouldn't cost you any energy because the energy of a tachyon above
the speed of light is the same as the energy of a tachyon of some object below
this of a non-tachyon below the speed of light they're called tardions if you're
less speed of light so you could sort of jump from a tardion sub-sea state to a
tachyon super-sea state with no cost and energy if only you could figure out
some way to convert your mass into anti-mass. No, excuse me, not anti-mass,
imaginary mass. Anti-mass is another subject. Now, there's other ways to get
from one place to another. I mean, when you talk about going faster than light,
really what you want to do is get from here to there without traveling all the
steps in between. if you can do that then you can go faster than life there's
two ways at least that I know to do that one is to find a space warp you jump
into the space warp you go into hyperspace and then you come out of another
space warp somewhere else in our universe and if you can do that in a time
shorter than it takes you to travel over the top why then you've done that an
amazing thing about it is the Einstein general theory of relativity has space
warps in it. You can read about that in my article called Far Off Physics, which
I think is the August 78, 75 issue of Analog.
Then the other way to go faster in the speed of light is to destroy the space
between you and where you want to go. Now this space drive theory was invented
by a student of Roger Penrose. He's a scientific expert and relativist that
works with Hawking on gravitation. He's working on a thing called twister
theory. And in the twister theory the real universe is not what we see. That's
only a reduced image of it. The real universe is an eight dimensional universe
that's made up of twisters. The twisters not only make up all the particles in
the space and time that we live in. It even makes up the space and the time. It
takes a certain collection of twisters to make up a point in space. It takes
another collection of twisters to make up a point in time. This collection of
twisters is a fairly uniform thing, and that's why we see space as it is,
according to Penrose. Now, we don't know whether the twister theory is correct,
but Roger is hoping that it will turn out to be inaccurate. method of, I mean,
accurate theory for the inverse. Now, in Einstein's general theory of
relativity, a mass causes a curve in spacetime, which we, all it is is a
mathematical curvature, but we think it's a gravity force. Now, in Roger's
theory, Roger Penrose's theory, a mass causes a warp in twister space, which we
recognize as gravity. We don't know what's a warp in space. We call it a force,
called gravity force. In Rogers' twister space, a different kind of a twist
causes electricity. Another kind of a twist causes magnetism. And he hopes to
find all of the things that we call force are nothing more than different kinds
of warpedges in this eight-dimensional twister space. Now, the other thing the
students have found is if you warp the twister space too much, give it a real
strong warp, then it's no longer ordered well enough to make a piece of space or
a piece of time. So if you take a piece of twister space and you warp it badly,
the space and the time that it used to make now disappears. It's no longer
there. so their version of a different kind of a faster than light drive is you
take a spacecraft up you get it out away from the planets and so forth then you
turn on the twister warping machine in your spacecraft on the side towards Alpha
Centauri and you just warp that space so much that you warp that twister space
so much that the Space-time between here and Alpha Centauri disappears. And what
you'll see if you're sitting in the spacecraft is that all of a sudden Alpha
Centauri just come right towards you and then pretty soon you look out one
window, you see the sun. You look out the other window, you'll see Alpha
Centauri. Then the machine inside the spacecraft unwurps the space but on the
other side of the spacecraft and all that space now reappears between the
spacecraft and the sun. You watch the sun recede off into the distance while you
stay there with Alpha Centauri. So that's another way to get there. You just get
rid of the space between here and there. So those are two faster-than-light
drives that are based on theories, but they're good, strong scientific theories.
They aren't science fiction theories.
Okay, what about a closely allied topic, time travel, would that ever be
possible? Um, according to Einstein, it is possible. Again, you have to use very
strong gravity fields to travel in time. Now, of course, there's a simple one
-way time machine. We have to be living on one. If you live on the Earth, you'll
live a few milliseconds longer than somebody that has spent all of his life in
space because the Earth is a time machine that slows time down. Of course,
that's not really too useful. But once you start talking about black holes, the
time-violation effects become very large. And if you could somehow manage to
survive near a black hole, and don't forget the tides there are pretty
tremendous, if you could somehow survive near a black hole, you could live 10,
100 times longer than a person back on Earth. But if you make other kinds of
objects out of other kinds of machines, out of material with the density of a
neutron star or a black hole, then you can get some very interesting effects
because you can travel both backward and forward in time. Now, there's one
machine which has been predicted by a mathematical researcher at the University
of Texas called Roger Kerr many years ago it's called the Kerr metric it is an
exact solution to the Einstein gravity equation which makes it you know a very
powerful and scientifically recognized theory
various people including Brandon Carter have examined this solution to try and
found out what it means physically I mean after all all he did was come up with
a mathematical equation and said, this mathematical equation,
when substituted into Einstein's equation, solves it. So therefore, it is a
solution. It's allowed by the Einstein theory. Brandon Carter examined this
space that Kerr had described mathematically and began to realize that what it
was describing was a donut-shaped object
that typically is something about, if we had something about the size of 100,
excuse me, the mass of 100 suns, then it would be a donut-shaped object about
100 miles across. And it would be spinning very rapidly.
If you tried to go in the plane of the ring and you headed toward the ring, you
would find that you'd get into stronger and stronger, stronger gravity fields,
and you'd get dragged around by the gravity, and you'd finally get squashed by
the gravity as you hit the surface. If you come down along the axis, however,
you'd find that you'd be attracted toward this black hole donut, spinning black
hole donut, but you wouldn't go, you'd be attracted toward the middle where
there isn't any mass, okay? And so the equations are still quite valid there
because you're not getting into high If it's about 100 miles across, the tides
are going to be not too nice. It would be maybe 10 or 100 gravities, but not
enough that you couldn't stand it if you worked at it. And you would find
yourself falling right through the donut hole. And the amazing thing is,
according to what the equations were saying, is that you would not come out on
the other side of that donut. Instead, you would enter a hyperspace. because as
you travel closer and closer to the black hole, this twisting gravity space that
the black hole was making, this donut-shaped black hole was making, would start
distorting your space and time compared to what it used to be when you were far
away from it. Your forward direction, in other words, the direction that you're
facing in, would start to have a lot of time mixed up with it. And what you
would call time starts to become part of a space direction. By the time you hit
the center of that ring, your forward direction has been turned into time. And
what used to be time to you has been turned into your forward direction. Now,
you don't know this because you're just falling through. You're just fat and
happy in your own little coordinate system. So you go into the fall off of this
black hole. You look back at the black hole and you'll find that instead of
pulling it, pulling you toward it, it's now pushing you away. when you get
through the black hole, you'll find that the other side is negative matter, not
imaginary matter like I was talking about before, but negative matter that
pushes you away. And so you'd enter this hyperspace. If you're lucky enough to
find another one, you can come out again. But that's your space for, but you're
now in this hyperspace and things are quite strange there, not to you, but in
general they will be, and there's a lot of twisted, whirling space around you
because of the other side of the black hole, if you turn on your rockets and you
travel opposite to the direction of the spin of the donut, you will be going
backward, according to the donut. You'll be going backward in space. If you go
the other way, you'll be going forward in space. You do this for a while, then
you turn on your rocket again and go back up through the hole and you come back
out into normal space. Well, while you were in the hyperspace, you traveled
forward in what you thought was space. Really, according to our view outside,
you were traveling forward in time. If you traveled backwards in space
underneath that black hole, you would be going backwards in time. All of this is
published in an article in the Physical Review, again, a most prestigious
scientific journal. The resulting effects are described by Carter as saying, a
black, a spinning, ultimately spinning black hole is like a time machine. He
says that in the article. And he refuses to believe it. He says there must,
therefore, be something wrong with the Einstein general theory of relativity,
because it violates causality. Now, that's what he wants to believe. I believe
that maybe there's something wrong with causality, rather than with Einstein's
theory. Now, there have been scientists that refused, that didn't want to accept
this paper by Carter. There have been a lot of papers published since which said
that there are flaws in those arguments. One of the flaws is that if you try and
go through this black hole, the very fact that you are there and your mass is
there will cause the black hole to collapse because it's not a stable situation.
And any minor perturbation, including you trying to go through it, will cause it
to collapse. My point is that there are a lot of things in this world that are
not stable, and yet they still don't collapse because we're there to keep them,
with feedback loops, keep them from collapsing. If we learn to develop the
power, we can keep a black hole from collapsing while we're going through it. So
from a scientific point of view, time travel is not impossible. It's just
difficult. There are also other solutions to the Einstein equations, and I think
I know of at least two others that aren't as accurate as the curve solution, I
mean, they involve approximations. But from an engineering point of view, it's
really kind of trivial, although mathematicians could argue engineers wouldn't.
Those solutions are good solutions. One of them I call the Tipler time machine,
and it's been used by Larry Niven and also by Fred Pohl, and I, of course, used
it in an article and analog. And there's another one, just a collapsing cloud of
dust will have time-confusing regions in it. So the Einstein's theory of general
relativity seems to say that you can go backward and forward in time. It
involves engineering that humans will never do because by the time we develop
those engineering capabilities we'll have evolved to something else than humans.
But still, it's not impossible, theoretically, to have both faster-than-light
travel or time machines as far as I'm concerned.